.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2020-2021 ProcursusTeam
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-4-Clause
.\"
.Dd October 15, 2021
.Dt UIALERT 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm uialert
.Nd Display an alert
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl b Ar body
.Op Fl i Ar prompt
.Op Fl j
.Op Fl p Ar primary
.Op Fl -priority Ar number
.Op Fl s Ar second
.Op Fl -secure Ar prompt
.Op Fl t Ar third
.Op Fl -timeout Ar number
.Ar title
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Display a native alert in the GUI from the command line.
The title will be set to
.Ar title .
It will print the response to each input and the index of the selected button to
.Ar stdout .
.Ss OUTPUT
.Bl -tag -width 4n -offset indent -compact
.It Sy 0
The primary button was pressed.
.It Sy 1
The secondary button was pressed.
.It Sy 2
The tertiary button was pressed.
.It Sy 3
The alert timed out or was closed without a response.
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl b , -body Ar body
Set the alert's body text to
.Ar body .
.It Fl i , -inpute Ar prompt
Add a text box with a prompt of
.Ar prompt .
This can be specified multiple times to create more inputs.
.It Fl j , -json
Print the output in JSON.
.It Fl p , -primary Ar primary
Set the default button's text to be
.Ar primary ,
instead of the default of
.Qq OK .
.It Fl -priority Ar number
Set the priority of the alert to be
.Ar number .
.Ar number
must be between 0 and 3, inclusive.
If not specified the priority will be 1.
This will only affect the appearence of the alert on
.Os macOS.
.It Fl s , -secondary Ar secondary
Set the second button's text to be
.Ar secondary ,
if unset, this button will not show.
.It Fl -secure Ar prompt
This is identical to
.Fl i ,
except the inputed text will be treated as a password.
.It Fl t , -tertiary Ar third
Set the third button's text to be
.Ar third ,
if unset, this button will not show.
.It Fl -timeout Ar number
After
.Ar number
seconds, dismiss the alert.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Create an alert with one button that says
.Qq OK
.Dl "uialert -b \*qThis is the body\*q \*qAn Interesting Title\*q"
.Pp
Create an alert with two buttons, where the default button says
.Qq Cancel .
.Dl "uialert -p \*qCancel\*q -s \*qContinue Anyways\*q -b \*qContinue?\*q \*qThis Action Will Delete Data\*q"
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
utility first appeared in uikittools on Feburary 26, 2008, written by
.An Jay Qo Saurik Qc Freeman .
Later, it was reimplemented by
.An Cameron Katri
for uikittools-ng on October 15, 2021 with completely different options and calling.
