.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2020-2023 ProcursusTeam
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-4-Clause
.\"
.Dd January 29, 2023
.Dt UICACHE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm uicache
.Nd Update registered applications
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl afhlrv
.Op Fl i Ar id
.Op Fl p Ar path
.Op Fl u Ar path
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Update iOS registered applications and optionally restart SpringBoard.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl a , -all
Iterate through the system applications and update the cache to reflect any changes.
This replicates behavior of the old
.Nm
ran without options.
.It Fl f , -force
Forces all applications to be reregistered when used with
.Fl a
rather than just the changes.
This option will make
.Fl a
significantly slower.
When used with
.Fl p
or
.Fl u ,
.Nm
will operate on apps installed from the App Store.
.It Fl h , -help
Prints help text.
.It Fl i , -info Ar bundleid
Shows information about the application with the specified bundle ID.
.It Fl l , -list
Lists the bundle ID and path for each registered application.
.It Fl p , -path Ar path
Registers or updates an application bundle, at the specified
.Ar path
, to the cache.
.It Fl s , -force-system
Force register an app as a system app.
.Pp
When registering an app inside /var/containers/Bundle/Application, it will normally
be registered as a user app.
When using this flag, the app will be registered as a system app,
regardless of whether it resides in /var/containers/Bundle/Application or not.
.It Fl r , -respring
Restarts SpringBoard and backboard after all other actions.
.It Fl u , -unregister Ar path
Unregisters an application bundle, using the specified
.Ar path
, from the cache.
.It Fl v , -verbose
Print out which apps are registered and unregistered when used with
.Fl a .
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
To refresh all applications
.Dl "uicache -a"
.Pp
To register Sileo
.Dl "uicache -p /Applications/Sileo.app"
.Pp
To show information about the Settings app
.Dl "uicache -i com.apple.preferences"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sbreload 1 ,
.Xr uiopen 1
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
utility first appeared in uikittools on September 14, 2008, written by
.An Jay Qo Saurik Qc Freeman .
Later, it was reimplemented by
.An CoolStar
for the Chimera jailbreak on April 30, 2019.
The
.Fl l
and
.Fl i
flags were added to uikittools-ng on April 4, 2021, by
.An Cameron Katri .
