@node gnutls-serv Invocation
@heading Invoking gnutls-serv
@pindex gnutls-serv

Server program that listens to incoming TLS connections.

@anchor{gnutls-serv usage}
@subheading gnutls-serv help/usage (@option{-?})
@cindex gnutls-serv help

The text printed is the same whether selected with the @code{help} option
(@option{--help}) or the @code{more-help} option (@option{--more-help}).  @code{more-help} will print
the usage text by passing it through a pager program.
@code{more-help} is disabled on platforms without a working
@code{fork(2)} function.  The @code{PAGER} environment variable is
used to select the program, defaulting to @file{more}.  Both will exit
with a status code of 0.

@exampleindent 0
@example
gnutls-serv - GnuTLS server
Usage:  gnutls-serv [ -<flag> [<val>] | --<name>[@{=| @}<val>] ]... 

None:

   -d, --debug=num            Enable debugging
				- it must be in the range:
				  0 to 9999
       --sni-hostname=str     Server's hostname for server name extension
       --sni-hostname-fatal   Send fatal alert on sni-hostname mismatch
       --alpn=str             Specify ALPN protocol to be enabled by the server
       --alpn-fatal           Send fatal alert on non-matching ALPN name
       --noticket             Don't accept session tickets
       --earlydata            Accept early data
       --maxearlydata=num     The maximum early data size to accept
				- it must be in the range:
				  1 to 2147483648
       --nocookie             Don't require cookie on DTLS sessions
   -g, --generate             Generate Diffie-Hellman parameters
   -q, --quiet                Suppress some messages
       --nodb                 Do not use a resumption database
       --http                 Act as an HTTP server
       --echo                 Act as an Echo server
       --crlf                 Do not replace CRLF by LF in Echo server mode
   -u, --udp                  Use DTLS (datagram TLS) over UDP
       --mtu=num              Set MTU for datagram TLS
				- it must be in the range:
				  0 to 17000
       --srtp-profiles=str    Offer SRTP profiles
   -a, --disable-client-cert  Do not request a client certificate
				- prohibits the option 'require-client-cert'
   -r, --require-client-cert  Require a client certificate
       --verify-client-cert   If a client certificate is sent then verify it
       --compress-cert=str    Compress certificate
   -b, --heartbeat            Activate heartbeat support
       --x509fmtder           Use DER format for certificates to read from
       --priority=str         Priorities string
       --dhparams=file        DH params file to use
				- file must pre-exist
       --x509cafile=str       Certificate file or PKCS #11 URL to use
       --x509crlfile=file     CRL file to use
				- file must pre-exist
       --x509keyfile=str      X.509 key file or PKCS #11 URL to use
       --x509certfile=str     X.509 Certificate file or PKCS #11 URL to use
       --rawpkkeyfile=str     Private key file (PKCS #8 or PKCS #12) or PKCS #11 URL to use
       --rawpkfile=str        Raw public-key file to use
				- requires the option 'rawpkkeyfile'
       --srppasswd=file       SRP password file to use
				- file must pre-exist
       --srppasswdconf=file   SRP password configuration file to use
				- file must pre-exist
       --pskpasswd=file       PSK password file to use
				- file must pre-exist
       --pskhint=str          PSK identity hint to use
       --ocsp-response=str    The OCSP response to send to client
       --ignore-ocsp-response-errors  Ignore any errors when setting the OCSP response
   -p, --port=num             The port to connect to
   -l, --list                 Print a list of the supported algorithms and modes
       --provider=file        Specify the PKCS #11 provider library
				- file must pre-exist
       --keymatexport=str     Label used for exporting keying material
       --keymatexportsize=num Size of the exported keying material
       --recordsize=num       The maximum record size to advertise
				- it must be in the range:
				  0 to 16384
       --httpdata=file        The data used as HTTP response
				- file must pre-exist

Version, usage and configuration options:

   -v, --version[=arg]        output version information and exit
   -h, --help                 display extended usage information and exit
   -!, --more-help            extended usage information passed thru pager

Options are specified by doubled hyphens and their name or by a single
hyphen and the flag character.

Server program that listens to incoming TLS connections.

Please send bug reports to:  <bugs@@gnutls.org>

@end example
@exampleindent 4

@subheading debug option (-d).
@anchor{gnutls-serv debug}

This is the ``enable debugging'' option.
This option takes a ArgumentType.NUMBER argument.
Specifies the debug level.
@subheading sni-hostname option.
@anchor{gnutls-serv sni-hostname}

This is the ``server's hostname for server name extension'' option.
This option takes a ArgumentType.STRING argument.
Server name of type host_name that the server will recognise as its own. If the server receives client hello with different name, it will send a warning-level unrecognized_name alert.
@subheading alpn option.
@anchor{gnutls-serv alpn}

This is the ``specify alpn protocol to be enabled by the server'' option.
This option takes a ArgumentType.STRING argument.
Specify the (textual) ALPN protocol for the server to use.
@subheading require-client-cert option (-r).
@anchor{gnutls-serv require-client-cert}

This is the ``require a client certificate'' option.
This option before 3.6.0 used to imply --verify-client-cert.
Since 3.6.0 it will no longer verify the certificate by default.
@subheading verify-client-cert option.
@anchor{gnutls-serv verify-client-cert}

This is the ``if a client certificate is sent then verify it'' option.
Do not require, but if a client certificate is sent then verify it and close the connection if invalid.
@subheading compress-cert option.
@anchor{gnutls-serv compress-cert}

This is the ``compress certificate'' option.
This option takes a ArgumentType.STRING argument.
This option sets a supported compression method for certificate compression.
@subheading heartbeat option (-b).
@anchor{gnutls-serv heartbeat}

This is the ``activate heartbeat support'' option.
Regularly ping client via heartbeat extension messages
@subheading priority option.
@anchor{gnutls-serv priority}

This is the ``priorities string'' option.
This option takes a ArgumentType.STRING argument.
TLS algorithms and protocols to enable. You can
use predefined sets of ciphersuites such as PERFORMANCE,
NORMAL, SECURE128, SECURE256. The default is NORMAL.

Check  the  GnuTLS  manual  on  section  ``Priority strings'' for more
information on allowed keywords
@subheading x509keyfile option.
@anchor{gnutls-serv x509keyfile}

This is the ``x.509 key file or pkcs #11 url to use'' option.
This option takes a ArgumentType.STRING argument.
Specify the private key file or URI to use; it must correspond to
the certificate specified in --x509certfile. Multiple keys and certificates
can be specified with this option and in that case each occurrence of keyfile
must be followed by the corresponding x509certfile or vice-versa.
@subheading x509certfile option.
@anchor{gnutls-serv x509certfile}

This is the ``x.509 certificate file or pkcs #11 url to use'' option.
This option takes a ArgumentType.STRING argument.
Specify the certificate file or URI to use; it must correspond to
the key specified in --x509keyfile. Multiple keys and certificates
can be specified with this option and in that case each occurrence of keyfile
must be followed by the corresponding x509certfile or vice-versa.
@subheading x509dsakeyfile option.
@anchor{gnutls-serv x509dsakeyfile}

This is an alias for the @code{x509keyfile} option,
@pxref{gnutls-serv x509keyfile, the x509keyfile option documentation}.

@subheading x509dsacertfile option.
@anchor{gnutls-serv x509dsacertfile}

This is an alias for the @code{x509certfile} option,
@pxref{gnutls-serv x509certfile, the x509certfile option documentation}.

@subheading x509ecckeyfile option.
@anchor{gnutls-serv x509ecckeyfile}

This is an alias for the @code{x509keyfile} option,
@pxref{gnutls-serv x509keyfile, the x509keyfile option documentation}.

@subheading x509ecccertfile option.
@anchor{gnutls-serv x509ecccertfile}

This is an alias for the @code{x509certfile} option,
@pxref{gnutls-serv x509certfile, the x509certfile option documentation}.

@subheading rawpkkeyfile option.
@anchor{gnutls-serv rawpkkeyfile}

This is the ``private key file (pkcs #8 or pkcs #12) or pkcs #11 url to use'' option.
This option takes a ArgumentType.STRING argument.
Specify the private key file or URI to use; it must correspond to
the raw public-key specified in --rawpkfile. Multiple key pairs
can be specified with this option and in that case each occurrence of keyfile
must be followed by the corresponding rawpkfile or vice-versa.

In order to instruct the application to negotiate raw public keys one
must enable the respective certificate types via the priority strings (i.e. CTYPE-CLI-*
and CTYPE-SRV-* flags).

Check  the  GnuTLS  manual  on  section  ``Priority strings'' for more
information on how to set certificate types.
@subheading rawpkfile option.
@anchor{gnutls-serv rawpkfile}

This is the ``raw public-key file to use'' option.
This option takes a ArgumentType.STRING argument.

@noindent
This option has some usage constraints.  It:
@itemize @bullet
@item
must appear in combination with the following options:
rawpkkeyfile.
@end itemize

Specify the raw public-key file to use; it must correspond to
the private key specified in --rawpkkeyfile. Multiple key pairs
can be specified with this option and in that case each occurrence of keyfile
must be followed by the corresponding rawpkfile or vice-versa.

In order to instruct the application to negotiate raw public keys one
must enable the respective certificate types via the priority strings (i.e. CTYPE-CLI-*
and CTYPE-SRV-* flags).

Check  the  GnuTLS  manual  on  section  ``Priority strings'' for more
information on how to set certificate types.
@subheading ocsp-response option.
@anchor{gnutls-serv ocsp-response}

This is the ``the ocsp response to send to client'' option.
This option takes a ArgumentType.STRING argument.
If the client requested an OCSP response, return data from this file to the client.
@subheading ignore-ocsp-response-errors option.
@anchor{gnutls-serv ignore-ocsp-response-errors}

This is the ``ignore any errors when setting the ocsp response'' option.
That option instructs gnutls to not attempt to match the provided OCSP responses with the certificates.
@subheading list option (-l).
@anchor{gnutls-serv list}

This is the ``print a list of the supported algorithms and modes'' option.
Print a list of the supported algorithms and modes. If a priority string is given then only the enabled ciphersuites are shown.
@subheading provider option.
@anchor{gnutls-serv provider}

This is the ``specify the pkcs #11 provider library'' option.
This option takes a ArgumentType.FILE argument.
This will override the default options in /etc/gnutls/pkcs11.conf
@subheading version option (-v).
@anchor{gnutls-serv version}

This is the ``output version information and exit'' option.
This option takes a ArgumentType.KEYWORD argument.
Output version of program and exit.  The default mode is `v', a simple
version.  The `c' mode will print copyright information and `n' will
print the full copyright notice.
@subheading help option (-h).
@anchor{gnutls-serv help}

This is the ``display extended usage information and exit'' option.
Display usage information and exit.
@subheading more-help option (-!).
@anchor{gnutls-serv more-help}

This is the ``extended usage information passed thru pager'' option.
Pass the extended usage information through a pager.
@anchor{gnutls-serv exit status}
@subheading gnutls-serv exit status

One of the following exit values will be returned:
@table @samp
@item 0 (EXIT_SUCCESS)
Successful program execution.
@item 1 (EXIT_FAILURE)
The operation failed or the command syntax was not valid.
@end table
@anchor{gnutls-serv See Also}
@subsubheading gnutls-serv See Also
gnutls-cli-debug(1), gnutls-cli(1)
@anchor{gnutls-serv Examples}
@subsubheading gnutls-serv Examples
Running your own TLS server based on GnuTLS can be useful when
debugging clients and/or GnuTLS itself.  This section describes how to
use @code{gnutls-serv} as a simple HTTPS server.

The most basic server can be started as:

@example
gnutls-serv --http --priority "NORMAL:+ANON-ECDH:+ANON-DH"
@end example

It will only support anonymous ciphersuites, which many TLS clients
refuse to use.

The next step is to add support for X.509.  First we generate a CA:

@example
$ certtool --generate-privkey > x509-ca-key.pem
$ echo 'cn = GnuTLS test CA' > ca.tmpl
$ echo 'ca' >> ca.tmpl
$ echo 'cert_signing_key' >> ca.tmpl
$ certtool --generate-self-signed --load-privkey x509-ca-key.pem \
  --template ca.tmpl --outfile x509-ca.pem
@end example

Then generate a server certificate.  Remember to change the dns_name
value to the name of your server host, or skip that command to avoid
the field.

@example
$ certtool --generate-privkey > x509-server-key.pem
$ echo 'organization = GnuTLS test server' > server.tmpl
$ echo 'cn = test.gnutls.org' >> server.tmpl
$ echo 'tls_www_server' >> server.tmpl
$ echo 'encryption_key' >> server.tmpl
$ echo 'signing_key' >> server.tmpl
$ echo 'dns_name = test.gnutls.org' >> server.tmpl
$ certtool --generate-certificate --load-privkey x509-server-key.pem \
  --load-ca-certificate x509-ca.pem --load-ca-privkey x509-ca-key.pem \
  --template server.tmpl --outfile x509-server.pem
@end example

For use in the client, you may want to generate a client certificate
as well.

@example
$ certtool --generate-privkey > x509-client-key.pem
$ echo 'cn = GnuTLS test client' > client.tmpl
$ echo 'tls_www_client' >> client.tmpl
$ echo 'encryption_key' >> client.tmpl
$ echo 'signing_key' >> client.tmpl
$ certtool --generate-certificate --load-privkey x509-client-key.pem \
  --load-ca-certificate x509-ca.pem --load-ca-privkey x509-ca-key.pem \
  --template client.tmpl --outfile x509-client.pem
@end example

To be able to import the client key/certificate into some
applications, you will need to convert them into a PKCS#12 structure.
This also encrypts the security sensitive key with a password.

@example
$ certtool --to-p12 --load-ca-certificate x509-ca.pem \
  --load-privkey x509-client-key.pem --load-certificate x509-client.pem \
  --outder --outfile x509-client.p12
@end example

For icing, we'll create a proxy certificate for the client too.

@example
$ certtool --generate-privkey > x509-proxy-key.pem
$ echo 'cn = GnuTLS test client proxy' > proxy.tmpl
$ certtool --generate-proxy --load-privkey x509-proxy-key.pem \
  --load-ca-certificate x509-client.pem --load-ca-privkey x509-client-key.pem \
  --load-certificate x509-client.pem --template proxy.tmpl \
  --outfile x509-proxy.pem
@end example

Then start the server again:

@example
$ gnutls-serv --http \
            --x509cafile x509-ca.pem \
            --x509keyfile x509-server-key.pem \
            --x509certfile x509-server.pem
@end example

Try connecting to the server using your web browser.  Note that the
server listens to port 5556 by default.

While you are at it, to allow connections using ECDSA, you can also
create a ECDSA key and certificate for the server.  These credentials
will be used in the final example below.

@example
$ certtool --generate-privkey --ecdsa > x509-server-key-ecc.pem
$ certtool --generate-certificate --load-privkey x509-server-key-ecc.pem \
  --load-ca-certificate x509-ca.pem --load-ca-privkey x509-ca-key.pem \
  --template server.tmpl --outfile x509-server-ecc.pem
@end example


The next step is to add support for SRP authentication. This requires
an SRP password file created with @code{srptool}.
To start the server with SRP support:

@example
gnutls-serv --http --priority NORMAL:+SRP-RSA:+SRP \
            --srppasswdconf srp-tpasswd.conf \
            --srppasswd srp-passwd.txt
@end example

Let's also start a server with support for PSK. This would require
a password file created with @code{psktool}.

@example
gnutls-serv --http --priority NORMAL:+ECDHE-PSK:+PSK \
            --pskpasswd psk-passwd.txt
@end example

If you want a server with support for raw public-keys we can also add these
credentials. Note however that there is no identity information linked to these
keys as is the case with regular x509 certificates. Authentication must be done
via different means. Also we need to explicitly enable raw public-key certificates
via the priority strings.

@example
gnutls-serv --http --priority NORMAL:+CTYPE-CLI-RAWPK:+CTYPE-SRV-RAWPK \
            --rawpkfile srv.rawpk.pem \
            --rawpkkeyfile srv.key.pem
@end example


Finally, we start the server with all the earlier parameters and you
get this command:

@example
gnutls-serv --http --priority NORMAL:+PSK:+SRP:+CTYPE-CLI-RAWPK:+CTYPE-SRV-RAWPK \
            --x509cafile x509-ca.pem \
            --x509keyfile x509-server-key.pem \
            --x509certfile x509-server.pem \
            --x509keyfile x509-server-key-ecc.pem \
            --x509certfile x509-server-ecc.pem \
            --srppasswdconf srp-tpasswd.conf \
            --srppasswd srp-passwd.txt \
            --pskpasswd psk-passwd.txt \
            --rawpkfile srv.rawpk.pem \
            --rawpkkeyfile srv.key.pem
@end example
