@node gnutls-cli-debug Invocation
@heading Invoking gnutls-cli-debug
@pindex gnutls-cli-debug

TLS debug client. It sets up multiple TLS connections to 
a server and queries its capabilities. It was created to assist in debugging 
GnuTLS, but it might be useful to extract a TLS server's capabilities.
It connects to a TLS server, performs tests and print the server's 
capabilities. If called with the `-V' parameter more checks will be performed.
Can be used to check for servers with special needs or bugs.

@anchor{gnutls-cli-debug usage}
@subheading gnutls-cli-debug help/usage (@option{-?})
@cindex gnutls-cli-debug help

The text printed is the same whether selected with the @code{help} option
(@option{--help}) or the @code{more-help} option (@option{--more-help}).  @code{more-help} will print
the usage text by passing it through a pager program.
@code{more-help} is disabled on platforms without a working
@code{fork(2)} function.  The @code{PAGER} environment variable is
used to select the program, defaulting to @file{more}.  Both will exit
with a status code of 0.

@exampleindent 0
@example
gnutls-cli-debug - GnuTLS debug client
Usage:  gnutls-cli-debug [ -<flag> [<val>] | --<name>[@{=| @}<val>] ]... [hostname]

None:

   -d, --debug=num            Enable debugging
				- it must be in the range:
				  0 to 9999
   -V, --verbose              More verbose output
   -p, --port=num             The port to connect to
				- it must be in the range:
				  0 to 65536
       --app-proto            an alias for the 'starttls-proto' option
       --starttls-proto=str   The application protocol to be used to obtain the server's certificate (https, ftp, smtp, imap, ldap, xmpp, lmtp, pop3, nntp, sieve, postgres)

Version, usage and configuration options:

   -v, --version[=arg]        output version information and exit
   -h, --help                 display extended usage information and exit
   -!, --more-help            extended usage information passed thru pager

Options are specified by doubled hyphens and their name or by a single
hyphen and the flag character.
Operands and options may be intermixed.  They will be reordered.

TLS debug client. It sets up multiple TLS connections to 
a server and queries its capabilities. It was created to assist in debugging 
GnuTLS, but it might be useful to extract a TLS server's capabilities.
It connects to a TLS server, performs tests and print the server's 
capabilities. If called with the `-V' parameter more checks will be performed.
Can be used to check for servers with special needs or bugs.

Please send bug reports to:  <bugs@@gnutls.org>

@end example
@exampleindent 4

@subheading debug option (-d).
@anchor{gnutls-cli-debug debug}

This is the ``enable debugging'' option.
This option takes a ArgumentType.NUMBER argument.
Specifies the debug level.
@subheading app-proto option.
@anchor{gnutls-cli-debug app-proto}

This is an alias for the @code{starttls-proto} option,
@pxref{gnutls-cli-debug starttls-proto, the starttls-proto option documentation}.

@subheading starttls-proto option.
@anchor{gnutls-cli-debug starttls-proto}

This is the ``the application protocol to be used to obtain the server's certificate (https, ftp, smtp, imap, ldap, xmpp, lmtp, pop3, nntp, sieve, postgres)'' option.
This option takes a ArgumentType.STRING argument.
Specify the application layer protocol for STARTTLS. If the protocol is supported, gnutls-cli will proceed to the TLS negotiation.
@subheading version option (-v).
@anchor{gnutls-cli-debug version}

This is the ``output version information and exit'' option.
This option takes a ArgumentType.KEYWORD argument.
Output version of program and exit.  The default mode is `v', a simple
version.  The `c' mode will print copyright information and `n' will
print the full copyright notice.
@subheading help option (-h).
@anchor{gnutls-cli-debug help}

This is the ``display extended usage information and exit'' option.
Display usage information and exit.
@subheading more-help option (-!).
@anchor{gnutls-cli-debug more-help}

This is the ``extended usage information passed thru pager'' option.
Pass the extended usage information through a pager.
@anchor{gnutls-cli-debug exit status}
@subheading gnutls-cli-debug exit status

One of the following exit values will be returned:
@table @samp
@item 0 (EXIT_SUCCESS)
Successful program execution.
@item 1 (EXIT_FAILURE)
The operation failed or the command syntax was not valid.
@end table
@anchor{gnutls-cli-debug See Also}
@subsubheading gnutls-cli-debug See Also
gnutls-cli(1), gnutls-serv(1)
@anchor{gnutls-cli-debug Examples}
@subsubheading gnutls-cli-debug Examples
@example
$ gnutls-cli-debug localhost
GnuTLS debug client 3.5.0
Checking localhost:443
                             for SSL 3.0 (RFC6101) support... yes
                        whether we need to disable TLS 1.2... no
                        whether we need to disable TLS 1.1... no
                        whether we need to disable TLS 1.0... no
                        whether %NO_EXTENSIONS is required... no
                               whether %COMPAT is required... no
                             for TLS 1.0 (RFC2246) support... yes
                             for TLS 1.1 (RFC4346) support... yes
                             for TLS 1.2 (RFC5246) support... yes
                                  fallback from TLS 1.6 to... TLS1.2
                        for RFC7507 inappropriate fallback... yes
                                     for HTTPS server name... Local
                               for certificate chain order... sorted
                  for safe renegotiation (RFC5746) support... yes
                     for Safe renegotiation support (SCSV)... no
                    for encrypt-then-MAC (RFC7366) support... no
                   for ext master secret (RFC7627) support... no
                           for heartbeat (RFC6520) support... no
                       for version rollback bug in RSA PMS... dunno
                  for version rollback bug in Client Hello... no
            whether the server ignores the RSA PMS version... yes
whether small records (512 bytes) are tolerated on handshake... yes
    whether cipher suites not in SSL 3.0 spec are accepted... yes
whether a bogus TLS record version in the client hello is accepted... yes
         whether the server understands TLS closure alerts... partially
            whether the server supports session resumption... yes
                      for anonymous authentication support... no
                      for ephemeral Diffie-Hellman support... no
                   for ephemeral EC Diffie-Hellman support... yes
                    ephemeral EC Diffie-Hellman group info... SECP256R1
                  for AES-128-GCM cipher (RFC5288) support... yes
                  for AES-128-CCM cipher (RFC6655) support... no
                for AES-128-CCM-8 cipher (RFC6655) support... no
                  for AES-128-CBC cipher (RFC3268) support... yes
             for CAMELLIA-128-GCM cipher (RFC6367) support... no
             for CAMELLIA-128-CBC cipher (RFC5932) support... no
                     for 3DES-CBC cipher (RFC2246) support... yes
                  for ARCFOUR 128 cipher (RFC2246) support... yes
                                       for MD5 MAC support... yes
                                      for SHA1 MAC support... yes
                                    for SHA256 MAC support... yes
                              for ZLIB compression support... no
                     for max record size (RFC6066) support... no
                for OCSP status response (RFC6066) support... no
              for OpenPGP authentication (RFC6091) support... no
@end example

You could also use the client to debug services with starttls capability.
@example
$ gnutls-cli-debug --starttls-proto smtp --port 25 localhost
@end example

