.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2020-2021 ProcursusTeam
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-4-Clause
.\"
.Dd October 29, 2021
.Dt UIDISPLAY 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm uidisplay
.Nd get and set options related to the display
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl a Ar state
.Op Fl b Oo Ar + Ns | Ns Ar - Oc Ns Ar num
.Op Fl d Ar state
.Op Fl h
.Op Fl i Op Ar key
.Op Fl j
.Op Fl n Ar state
.Op Fl t Ar state
.Op Fl w Ar state
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
will print or set the brightness of your device, as well as other options such as Auto Brightness, Dark Mode, Night Shift, True Tone and Reduce White Point.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl a , -autobrightness Ar state
Set the Auto Brightness setting to
.Ar state ,
which can be one of on, 1, off, or 0.
.It Fl b , -brightness Oo Ar + Ns | Ns Ar - Oc Ns Ar num
Set the brightness to
.Ar num ,
it must be between 0 and 100.
A trailing
.Dq %
is valid.
If
.Ar +
is used the brightness will be incremented by
.Ar num .
If
.Ar -
is used the brightness will be decremented by
.Ar num .
.It Fl d , -darkmode Ar state
Override the Dark Mode value to
.Ar state ,
which can be one of on, 1, off, or 0.
.It Fl h
Prints a help text.
.It Fl i , -info Ar key
Print the brightness and the current setting of Auto Brightness, Dark Mode, Night Shift, True Tone and Reduce White Point.
If
.Ar key
is one of
.Ar autobrightness ,
.Ar brightness ,
.Ar darkmode ,
.Ar nightmode ,
.Ar truetone ,
.Ar reducewhitepoint ,
.Ar scale ,
.Ar width ,
or
.Ar height ,
only print the value of
.Ar key .
.It Fl j , -json
Change the output format for info to JSON.
.It Fl l , -lock
Lock the device.
.It Fl n , -nightshift Ar state
Override the Night Shift value to
.Ar state ,
which can be one of on, 1, off, or 0.
.It Fl t , -truetone Ar state
Set the True Tone setting to
.Ar state ,
which can be one of on, 1, off, or 0.
.It Fl w , -reducewhitepoint Ar state
Set the Reduce White Point setting to
.Ar state ,
which can be one of on, 1, off, or 0.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The
.Nm
utility exits with one of the following values:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It 0
Everything worked as expected.
.It 1
Something went wrong, an error message will also be printed.
.It 2
The requested action is not supported.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Increase the brightness by 10 percent:
.Dl "uidisplay -b +10"
.Pp
Print the current brightness:
.Dl "uidisplay -i brightness"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr uiopen 1
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
utility first appeared in uikittools-ng on October 29, 2021, written by
.An absidue .
